Mm.....There's that song again, drifting up the creek like it owns the place.....Well now — pull up a warm spot, little one. Whether you've sat with us a hundred times... or this is your very first morning by the water.....I'm Old Timber. The elephant elder. And this is where every story starts — right here, pondside, with me.
Now....Today, my friends, I want to ask about something.....Have you ever forgiven somebody... really and truly forgiven them... for something they did?....And then... a while later... they went and did the very same thing? ...The exact same thing?
Now — picture the stepping-stones, across the narrow part of the creek. Flat grey rocks, set in a wobbly little line.....The God who made this creek set those stones a touch crooked, I always figured... just so a body would have to watch his step.....And this morning, one bright and feathery creature... was not watching his step at all.
Down to the water came Garingo the parrot — all bright feathers and big loud speeches — and he stepped out onto the stones, certain as anything,
BEHOLD! The crossing of the creek — performed with grace! With poise! With the easy dignity of a creature who has done this ten thousand times! Stone one. Stone two. Stone three, the famous wobbly one, which I shall conquer with a single fearless step, and — whoa. Whoa! WHOA —
A SPLASH. That was a splash! I am wet. I am wet up to my elegant ankles! That stone — it MOVED! It betrayed me! A creature of my standing, dunked like a common tea-biscuit!
And out from the reeds, slow and certain, came Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly, who is slow of speech and very sharp of thought — and she looked at the dripping parrot and said,
...It's the third stone. ...It's always been the third stone.
Always? ALWAYS? You KNEW the third stone was a treacherous, ankle-soaking villain — and you said nothing?
...I said it just now.
Wait. Wait — wait. That stone wobbles because somebody PROMISED to wedge a pebble under it. Two whole summers ago. Somebody slow. Somebody green. Somebody with a shell.
...I had a busy summer.
You are a TORTOISE. You have never had a busy summer in the entire history of summers!
...Busy is relative.
Do you know what this IS? This is a repeat offense. It is the SECOND time you have let me walk straight into that wet trap.....The first time — two summers ago — I forgave you. I rose above it. I was MAGNIFICENT about it.
...You told everyone for a month.
I told them how GRACIOUSLY I forgave you! There is a difference! And now — NOW — we are at an impasse. We are, as the poets say... irreconcilable.
...What's that mean? ...It means we're not talking anymore.
Correct. We are NOT. Good day, tortoise. ...I said GOOD DAY.
...It's still the third stone.
Now... down low, in the cool mud by the bank, three small frogs had felt the whole thing happen.....The Mudpuppies — Splish, Splash, and Splosh — feel a quarrel in the water the way you or I feel a chill.
Ooh. Ooh — Splash, did you feel that? The bright one and the slow one had a FIGHT. A real one. I felt it go all the way down.
...Ooh! A real one! I felt it go all the way down. ...One whopper of a grudge!
AND ALSO — ! They MADE UP already! Two summers ago! I SAW it! Garingo did the whole speech with the wing thing! How can a made-up come UN-made?
Mm.....Now there's a thought worth chewing on, little ones.....I have never known a forgiving to come un-made. ...But I HAVE known one that needed doing twice. That's a different thing.....And there's an old line about that, as it happens. Folks have known about the second time for an awfully long while.....But that part comes later. First — let's go find a wet parrot and a quiet tortoise.
So I gathered them both, there on the bank.....Garingo — dripping on my favorite root. And Shelly — with her head pulled halfway in, which is the tortoise way of slamming a door.....Come on, now. Both of you. Sit.
I shall sit. I shall NOT look at her. I can sit and not-look at the very same time. It is one of my many talents.
...The grudge is fine.
...Is it, now. ...The grudge is fine. ...The way the branch was fine, Shelly?
...The branch was eventually fine.
Mm.....Eventually. ...That's a good word.....Now — let me ask the both of you one thing. And I want a true answer. Not a grand one... and not a quiet one.....Garingo. You forgave Shelly once already. So why does it hurt THIS much... the second time?
...Because.....Because I already spent my forgiving on this. I used it up. I was brave about it once.....And now I have to be brave about the very same thing again — and I don't have a speech for that. ...I don't have a wing thing for that.
Mm.....And Shelly. ...Same question — your side now.....You let your friend down twice... with the same little stone. ...Why didn't you just fix it... the second time?
...Because the first time he forgave me... it looked easy for him.....Like it didn't cost him a thing.....So I figured the stone didn't matter much. ...And then I figured... maybe I didn't matter much either.
Mm.....There it is.....The same God who keeps this whole creek running... keeps handing us the morning back. ...Even the mornings we'd rather skip.....And it looks to me, friends, like the two of you got handed this same morning... twice. ...Let's not waste it.
Shelly.....I made a speech the first time... because if I had told you the truth, it would have sounded too small.....The truth is — when I went into the water again today... I wasn't even angry about the water.
I was angry because I thought... last time he forgave me, it did not even matter. He'll only do it again.....And I HATED feeling like a friend who is easy to let down.....That is the part... that got me wet on the inside.
...And I heard your speech, Garingo. The brave one. The gracious one.....And the whole time I thought — he's only kind because it's easy for him. He doesn't even feel it.....So I stopped trying to deserve it. I left the stone wobbly... because I figured I didn't matter much either. ...That's a mean thing to think about a friend. I'm sorry I thought it.
...It cost me, Shelly. Both times. ...The first time, I just hid it behind a better word.....I'm sorry I let you think it was easy. It was never easy. ...I only wanted to look like the kind of creature it's easy for.
Ohhh.....I get it now, Splash.....Forgiving isn't ONE thing you do, and then it's done forever. ...It's a thing you have to keep DOING. Even when it's the same friend... being the same kind of bonk.
...And it's ALLOWED to be harder the second time. ...You don't have to pretend it's easy. ...You just have to do it anyway.
Mm.....That's it. ...That's the whole of it, little ones. ...You said it better than I could have.
You know who else takes turns being cold for each other?.....Penguins.....Way, way down south — in a blizzard so mean it would freeze your whiskers — they huddle up tight, in one great big crowd.....And the ones on the freezing outside edge... they don't stay there.
The whole huddle turns — slow as anything — so every bird takes a turn in the cold... and a turn in the warm middle.....No penguin stays warm while the rest go freezing. ...They BEAR it. For each other. By turns.....The God who made this creek made those penguins to take their turns at the cold edge.
Now....here's that old line I told you about.....A man named Paul once wrote a letter — to his friends, in a faraway town called Colossae. ...Folks kept it. And it's in the Bible, to this very day.....And here is what Paul wrote to them.
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any.
Forbearing one another.....That's an old, old word for it. ...It just means: put up with each other. Bear it. ...Not just the once. ...By turns. The way the huddle turns.....That, friends... is exactly what the two of you just did. Right here on my favorite root.
...So I shall forgive you again, Shelly. ...With no speech. With no wing thing. ...Just... again.
...And I'll wedge the pebble under the third stone. Today. ...While you watch.
From DRY land. I shall watch... from very, very dry land.
Mm....And now, friends... it's time for Professor Hoot's Totally True Facts — the part of the show where the most certain owl in all of Shiloh Creek... shares one fact he is absolutely, completely sure of.
Good evening! Good evening, and welcome once again to the only segment on this entire creek where every single word... is TRUE! It is I, Professor Hoot, here to deposit one verified fact directly into your eager little minds!
Is it about penguins? Please be about penguins! Old Tim-Ber said they take turns being cold, and I cannot STOP thinking about it!
It is, in FACT, about penguins! How splendidly guessed! Today's true, written-down, absolutely-not-invented fact is this: the emperor penguin truly DOES huddle in the cold — and the huddle slowly turns, so that every single bird takes its turn in the warm middle. Scientists have FILMED it. It is, plainly, the world's politest crowd.
...The politest crowd. ...It goes all the way down. ...Like a bell. On a cold rock.
I... do not know what that MEANS — but it was said with such conviction that I shall allow it.....Now! Which brings me, naturally, to the matter of the wandering albatross, a bird so vast it can glide a thousand miles without a single flap — ...Pardon. As I was saying. The penguins. The huddle. The turns.
A penguin out in the open wind will tuck in beside another penguin it has never even MET — simply because two birds together stay warmer than one bird alone.....Which is, when you think about it, a deeply good reason to put up with somebody. ...Even somebody who left a stone wobbly. ...Twice.....THIS has been a fact. Good evening!
Mm.....A fine fact, Professor. ...Tied to the penguins... and not to the lesson. ...That part's mine to keep.
Mm.....And before we go, friends... up from the mud come the Mudpuppies, with a question of their very own.....Splish, Splash, and Splosh ? three frogs, and one enormous question between them. Here come the Mudpuppy Minutes.
Mudpuppies ? gather close, all of you. ...Today, we shall answer the BIGGEST question there is. ...Why... is the sky... so HIGH up?
Ooh! I know this one! ...Somebody PUSHED it. ...A very tall somebody. ...With a very long stick.
Nuh-uh! The sky is SHY! ...It saw us all looking up at it... and away it climbed, higher and higher, to hide! ...Poor shy sky.
...No. ...Both wrong. ...The sky FLOATED up. ...Like a bubble. ...A big, blue, very slow bubble.
...Wait. ...Wait. ...Isn't the sky just... air? ...Air, going up and up, further than any frog can hop?
Ohh no. ...No, no ? too plain. That can't be it. ...A shy floating bubble is MUCH more interesting.
...Agreed. ...We move on.....Mudpuppies ? we have solved it at last. ...The sky is a shy blue bubble... that floated up to hide. ...This has been the Mudpuppy Minutes!
Mm.....Now ? just between you and me, little ones... the sky isn't really shy, and nobody pushed it.....It's only air. ...Lots and lots of air, reaching up and up, further than anyone can hop ? and that's the honest truth of it.....But don't tell the Mudpuppies. ...They do so love a good bubble.
Mm.....And that, my friends, is the day the old grudge by the creek... got handed its second morning.....The third stone is wedged. The parrot is dry. And the tortoise is — by her own report — fine. ...And this time, I believe her.
Here's a small thing to carry this week, little ones.....If somebody you love does the same hurtful thing twice... and the old hurt comes back as fresh as the first time... that's all right. You're allowed to feel it.....And then — you take your turn out in the cold for them, the way the penguins do. ...You bear with them. And you forgive them. ...Again.
So this is Old Timber.....Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.....Walk gently out there, little ones. ...And the next time you forgive a friend the second time... give it a little nod, from me.